As I remember, Adam, it was upon this
fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand
crowns, and, as thou sayst, charged my brother on
his blessing to breed me well. And there begins my
sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
report speaks goldenly of his profit. For my part, he
keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you_UNK
that "keeping," for a gentleman of my birth, that
differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are
bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their
feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that
end, riders dearly hired. But I, his brother, gain
nothing under him but growth, for the which his
animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him
as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives
me, the something that nature gave me his countenance
seems to take from me. He lets me feed with
his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as
much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my
education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me, and the
spirit of my father, which I think is within me,
begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no
longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy
how to avoid it.

Yonder comes my master, your_SG brother.

Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he
will shake me up.

Now, sir, what make you_SG here?

Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.

What mar you_SG then, sir?

Marry, sir, I am helping you_SG to mar that
which God made, a poor unworthy brother of
yours_SG, with idleness.

Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught
awhile.

Shall I keep your_SG hogs and eat husks with
them? What prodigal portion have I spent that I
should come to such penury?

Know you_SG where you_SG are, sir?

O, sir, very well: here in your_SG orchard.

Know you_SG before whom, sir?

Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I
know you_SG are my eldest brother, and in the gentle
condition of blood you_SG should so know me. The
courtesy of nations allows you_SG my better in that you_SG
are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not
away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt
us. I have as much of my father in me as you_SG, albeit I
confess your_SG coming before me is nearer to his
reverence.

What, boy!

Come,
come, elder brother, you_SG are too young in this.

Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?

I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys. He was my father, and he is
thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains.
Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this
hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out
thy tongue for saying so. Thou hast railed on thyself.

Sweet masters, be patient. For
your_PL father's remembrance, be at accord.

Let me go, I say.

I will not till I please. You_SG shall hear me. My
father charged you_SG in his will to give me good
education. You_SG have trained me like a peasant,
obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike
qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
me, and I will no longer endure it. Therefore allow
me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or
give me the poor allottery my father left me by
testament. With that I will go buy my fortunes.

And what wilt thou do--beg when that is
spent? Well, sir, get you_SG in. I will not long be
troubled with you_SG. You_SG shall have some part of your_SG
will. I pray you_SG leave me.

I will no further offend you_SG than becomes
me for my good.

Get you_SG with him, you_SG old dog.

Is "old dog" my reward? Most true, I have lost
my teeth in your_SG service. God be with my old
master. He would not have spoke such a word.

Is it even so? Begin you_UNK to grow upon me? I
will physic your_UNK rankness, and yet give no thousand
crowns neither.--Holla, Dennis!

Calls your_SG Worship?

Was not Charles, the Duke's wrestler, here to
speak with me?

So please you_SG, he is here at the door and
importunes access to you_SG.

Call him in. 'Twill be a good
way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.


Good morrow to your_SG Worship.

Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news
at the new court?

There's no news at the court, sir, but the old
news. That is, the old duke is banished by his
younger brother the new duke, and three or four
loving lords have put themselves into voluntary
exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich
the new duke. Therefore he gives them good leave
to wander.

Can you_SG tell if Rosalind, the Duke's daughter,
be banished with her father?

O, no, for the Duke's daughter her cousin so
loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
that she would have followed her exile or have
died to stay behind her. She is at the court and no
less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter,
and never two ladies loved as they do.

Where will the old duke live?

They say he is already in the Forest of Arden,
and a many merry men with him; and there they
live like the old Robin Hood of England. They say
many young gentlemen flock to him every day and
fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden
world.

What, you_SG wrestle tomorrow before the new
duke?

Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you_SG
with a matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
that your_SG younger brother Orlando hath a
disposition to come in disguised against me to try a
fall. Tomorrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he
that escapes me without some broken limb shall
acquit him well. Your_SG brother is but young and
tender, and for your_SG love I would be loath to foil
him, as I must for my own honor if he come in.
Therefore, out of my love to you_SG, I came hither to
acquaint you_SG withal, that either you_SG might stay him
from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well
as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own
search and altogether against my will.

Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had
myself notice of my brother's purpose herein, and
have by underhand means labored to dissuade him
from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles, it is
the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of
ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good
parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me
his natural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I
had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger.
And thou wert best look to 't, for if thou dost him
any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace
himself on thee, he will practice against thee by
poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device,
and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by
some indirect means or other. For I assure thee--
and almost with tears I speak it--there is not one so
young and so villainous this day living. I speak but
brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I must blush and weep, and thou must
look pale and wonder.

I am heartily glad I came hither to you_SG. If he
come tomorrow, I'll give him his payment. If ever
he go alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more.
And so God keep your_SG Worship.

Farewell, good Charles.
Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall see an
end of him, for my soul--yet I know not why--
hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle, never
schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of all
sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in
the heart of the world, and especially of my own
people, who best know him, that I am altogether
misprized. But it shall not be so long; this wrestler
shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the
boy thither, which now I'll go about.

I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.

Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am
mistress of, and would you_SG yet I were merrier?
Unless you_SG could teach me to forget a banished
father, you_SG must not learn me how to remember
any extraordinary pleasure.

Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full
weight that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished
father, had banished thy uncle, the Duke my father,
so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught
my love to take thy father for mine. So wouldst thou,
if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
tempered as mine is to thee.

Well, I will forget the condition of my estate
to rejoice in yours_SG.

You_SG know my father hath no child but I, nor
none is like to have; and truly, when he dies, thou
shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away from
thy father perforce, I will render thee again in
affection. By mine honor I will, and when I break
that oath, let me turn monster. Therefore, my sweet
Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.

From henceforth I will, coz, and devise
sports. Let me see--what think you_SG of falling in
love?

Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal; but
love no man in good earnest, nor no further in
sport neither than with safety of a pure blush thou
mayst in honor come off again.

What shall be our sport, then?

Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune
from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be
bestowed equally.

I would we could do so, for her benefits are
mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman
doth most mistake in her gifts to women.

'Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce
makes honest, and those that she makes honest she
makes very ill-favoredly.

Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to
Nature's. Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in
the lineaments of nature.

No? When Nature hath made a fair creature,
may she not by fortune fall into the fire?

Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune,
hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the
argument?

Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature,
when Fortune makes Nature's natural the
cutter-off of Nature's wit.

Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither,
but Nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too
dull to reason of such goddesses, and hath sent
this natural for our whetstone, for always the dullness
of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. 
How now, wit, whither wander you_SG?

Mistress, you_SG must come away to your_SG
father.

Were you_SG made the messenger?

No, by mine honor, but I was bid to come
for you_SG.

Where learned you_SG that oath, fool?

Of a certain knight that swore by his
honor they were good pancakes, and swore by his
honor the mustard was naught. Now, I'll stand to it,
the pancakes were naught and the mustard was
good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.

How prove you_SG that in the great heap of your_SG
knowledge?

Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your_SG wisdom.

Stand you_PL both forth now: stroke your_PL
chins, and swear by your_PL beards that I am a knave.

By our beards (if we had them), thou art.

By my knavery (if I had it), then I were.
But if you_UNK swear by that that is not, you_UNK are not
forsworn. No more was this knight swearing by his
honor, for he never had any, or if he had, he had
sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or
that mustard.

Prithee, who is 't that thou mean'st?

One that old Frederick, your_SG father, loves.

My father's love is enough to honor him.
Enough. Speak no more of him; you_SG 'll be whipped
for taxation one of these days.

The more pity that fools may not speak
wisely what wise men do foolishly.

By my troth, thou sayest true. For, since the little
wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery
that wise men have makes a great show. Here
comes Monsieur Le Beau.

With his mouth full of news.

Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their
young.

Then shall we be news-crammed.

All the better. We shall be the more
marketable.--Bonjour, Monsieur Le Beau. What's
the news?

Fair princess, you_SG have lost much good sport.

Sport? Of what color?

What color, madam? How shall I answer you_SG?

As wit and fortune will.

Or as the destinies decrees.

Well said. That was laid on with a trowel.

Nay, if I keep not my rank--

Thou losest thy old smell.

you_PL amaze me, ladies. I would have told you_PL of
good wrestling, which you_PL have lost the sight of.

Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.

I will tell you_PL the beginning, and if it please
your_PL Ladyships, you_PL may see the end, for the best is
yet to do, and here, where you_PL are, they are coming
to perform it.

Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.

There comes an old man and his three sons--

I could match this beginning with an old tale.

Three proper young men of excellent growth
and presence.

With bills on their necks: "Be it known unto
all men by these presents."

The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles,
the Duke's wrestler, which Charles in a moment
threw him and broke three of his ribs, that there is
little hope of life in him. So he served the second,
and so the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man
their father making such pitiful dole over them that
all the beholders take his part with weeping.

Alas!

But what is the sport, monsieur, that the
ladies have lost?

Why, this that I speak of.

Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is
the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was
sport for ladies.

Or I, I promise thee.

But is there any else longs to see this broken
music in his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon
rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?

You_UNK must if you_UNK stay here, for here is the place
appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to
perform it.

Yonder sure they are coming. Let us now stay
and see it.

Come on. Since the youth will not be
entreated, his own peril on his forwardness.

Is yonder the man?

Even he, madam.

Alas, he is too young. Yet he looks successfully.

How now, daughter and cousin? Are
you_PL crept hither to see the wrestling?

Ay, my liege, so please you_SG give us leave.

You_PL will take little delight in it, I can
tell you_PL, there is such odds in the man. In pity of the
challenger's youth, I would fain dissuade him, but
he will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if
you_PL can move him.

Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.

Do so. I'll not be by.

Monsieur the challenger, the
Princess calls for you_SG.

I attend them with all respect and duty.

Young man, have you_SG challenged Charles the
wrestler?

No, fair princess. He is the general challenger.
I come but in as others do, to try with him the
strength of my youth.

Young gentleman, your_SG spirits are too bold for
your_SG years. You_SG have seen cruel proof of this man's
strength. If you_SG saw yourself_SG with your_SG eyes or knew
yourself_SG with your_SG judgment, the fear of your_SG adventure
would counsel you_SG to a more equal enterprise.
We pray you_SG for your_SG own sake to embrace your_SG
own safety and give over this attempt.

Do, young sir. Your_SG reputation shall not
therefore be misprized. We will make it our suit to
the Duke that the wrestling might not go forward.

I beseech you_PL, punish me not with your_PL hard
thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny
so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let your_PL
fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial,
wherein, if I be foiled, there is but one shamed that
was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that is
willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for
I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for
in it I have nothing. Only in the world I fill up a
place which may be better supplied when I have
made it empty.

The little strength that I have, I would it
were with you_SG.

And mine, to eke out hers.

Fare you_SG well. Pray heaven I be deceived in
you_SG.

Your_SG heart's desires be with you_SG.

Come, where is this young gallant that is so
desirous to lie with his mother Earth?

 Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more
modest working.

You_UNK shall try but
one fall.

No, I warrant your_SG Grace you_SG shall not entreat
him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded
him from a first.

You_SG mean to mock me after, you_SG should not
have mocked me before. But come your_SG ways.

Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!

I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
fellow by the leg.

O excellent young man!

If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who
should down.

No more, no more.

Yes, I beseech your_SG Grace. I am not yet well
breathed.

How dost thou, Charles?

He cannot speak, my lord.

Bear him away.
What is thy name, young man?

 Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys.

I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
The world esteemed thy father honorable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this
deed
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well. Thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told me of another father.

Were I my father, coz, would I do this?

I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.

My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties
Ere he should thus have ventured.

Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him and encourage him.
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart.--Sir, you_SG have well deserved.
If you_SG do keep your_SG promises in love
But justly, as you_SG have exceeded all promise,
Your_SG mistress shall be happy.

Gentleman,
Wear this for me--one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more but that her hand lacks
means.--
Shall we go, coz?

Ay.--Fare you_SG well, fair gentleman.

Can I not say "I thank you_UNK"? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes.
I'll ask him what he would.--Did you_SG call, sir?
Sir, you_SG have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your_SG enemies.

Will you_SG go, coz?

Have with you_SG. Fare you_SG well.

What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando! Thou art overthrown.
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you_SG
To leave this place. Albeit you_SG have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
Yet such is now the Duke's condition
That he misconsters all that you_SG have done.
The Duke is humorous. What he is indeed
More suits you_SG to conceive than I to speak of.


I thank you_SG, sir, and pray you_SG tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
That here was at the wrestling?


Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished duke,
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you_SG that of late this duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father's sake;
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you_SG well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you_SG.


I rest much bounden to you_SG. Fare you_SG well.
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!

Why, cousin! Why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy,
not a word?

Not one to throw at a dog.

No, thy words are too precious to be cast away
upon curs. Throw some of them at me. Come, lame
me with reasons.

Then there were two cousins laid up, when
the one should be lamed with reasons, and the
other mad without any.

But is all this for your_SG father?

No, some of it is for my child's father. O,
how full of briers is this working-day world!

They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
holiday foolery. If we walk not in the trodden paths,
our very petticoats will catch them.

I could shake them off my coat. These burs
are in my heart.

Hem them away.

I would try, if I could cry "hem" and have
him.

Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.

O, they take the part of a better wrestler
than myself.

O, a good wish upon you_SG. You_SG will try in time, in
despite of a fall. But turning these jests out of
service, let us talk in good earnest. Is it possible on
such a sudden you_SG should fall into so strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?

The Duke my father loved his father dearly.

Doth it therefore ensue that you_SG should love his
son dearly? By this kind of chase I should hate him,
for my father hated his father dearly. Yet I hate not
Orlando.

No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.

Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

Let me love him for that, and do you_SG love
him because I do.

Look, here comes the Duke.

With his eyes full of anger.

Mistress, dispatch you_SG with your_SG safest haste,
And get you_SG from our court.

Me, uncle?

You_SG, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou beest found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.

I do beseech your_SG Grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic--
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your_SG Highness.

Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.


Yet your_SG mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.


Thou art thy father's daughter. There's enough.


So was I when your_SG Highness took his dukedom.
So was I when your_SG Highness banished him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me? My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.

Dear sovereign, hear me speak.


Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your_SG sake;
Else had she with her father ranged along.


I did not then entreat to have her stay.
It was your_SG pleasure and your_SG own remorse.
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And, wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans
Still we went coupled and inseparable.


She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Her very silence, and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more
virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.


Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of her company.


You_SG are a fool.--You_SG, niece, provide yourself_SG.
If you_SG outstay the time, upon mine honor
And in the greatness of my word, you_SG die.


O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

I have more cause.

Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee, be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter?

That he hath not.


No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your_SG change upon you_SG,
To bear your_SG griefs yourself_SG and leave me out.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.

Why, whither shall we go?


To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.


Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.


I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you_SG. So shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.

Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtal-ax upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will,
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside--
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.


What shall I call thee when thou art a man?


I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
And therefore look you_SG call me Ganymede.
But what will you_SG be called?


Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.


But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your_SG father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?


He'll go along o'er the wide world with me.
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.

Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
"This is no flattery. These are counselors
That feelingly persuade me what I am."
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.


I would not change it. Happy is your_SG Grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.


Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.

Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you_SG do more usurp
Than doth your_SG brother that hath banished you_SG.
Today my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood;
To the which place a poor sequestered stag
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt
Did come to languish. And indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.

But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?


O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
"Poor deer," quoth he, "thou mak'st a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much." Then, being there
alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
"'Tis right," quoth he. "Thus misery doth part
The flux of company." Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him. "Ay," quoth Jaques,
"Sweep on, you_PL fat and greasy citizens.
'Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you_PL look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.


And did you_PL leave him in this contemplation?


We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.

Show me the place.
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.

I'll bring you_SG to him straight.

Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be. Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.


I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.


My lord, the roinish clown at whom so oft
Your_SG Grace was wont to laugh is also missing.
Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
Your_SG daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles,
And she believes wherever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.


Send to his brother. Fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me.
I'll make him find him. Do this suddenly,
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.

Who's there?


What, my young master, O my gentle master,
O my sweet master, O you_SG memory
Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you_SG here?
Why are you_SG virtuous? Why do people love you_SG?
And wherefore are you_SG gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you_SG be so fond to overcome
The bonny prizer of the humorous duke?
Your_SG praise is come too swiftly home before you_SG.
Know you_SG not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours_SG. Your_SG virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you_SG.
O, what a world is this when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it!

  Why, what's the matter?

  O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors. Within this roof
The enemy of all your_SG graces lives.
Your_SG brother--no, no brother--yet the son--
Yet not the son, I will not call him son--
Of him I was about to call his father,
Hath heard your_SG praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you_SG use to lie,
And you_SG within it. If he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you_SG off.
I overheard him and his practices.
This is no place, this house is but a butchery.
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.


Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?


No matter whither, so you_SG come not here.


What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do;
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.


But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your_SG father,
Which I did store to be my foster nurse
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown.
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age. Here is the gold.
All this I give you_SG. Let me be your_SG servant.
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty,
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility.
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty but kindly. Let me go with you_SG.
I'll do the service of a younger man
In all your_SG business and necessities.


O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed.
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having. It is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways. We'll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We'll light upon some settled low content.


Master, go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years, many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore, it is too late a week.
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well, and not my master's debtor.


O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!

I care not for my spirits, if my legs were
not weary.

I could find in my heart to disgrace my
man's apparel and to cry like a woman, but I must
comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose
ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. Therefore
courage, good Aliena.

I pray you_UNK bear with me. I cannot go no further.

For my part, I had rather bear with you_SG
than bear you_SG. Yet I should bear no cross if I did
bear you_SG, for I think you_SG have no money in your_SG
purse.

Well, this is the Forest of Arden.

Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I.
When I was at home I was in a better place, but
travelers must be content.

Ay, be so, good Touchstone.

Look you_UNK who comes here, a young man and an old
in solemn talk.

That is the way to make her scorn you_SG still.


O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!


I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.


No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.
But if thy love were ever like to mine--
As sure I think did never man love so--
How many actions most ridiculous
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?


Into a thousand that I have forgotten.


O, thou didst then never love so heartily.
If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phoebe, Phoebe, Phoebe!	


Alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.

And I mine. I remember when I was in
love I broke my sword upon a stone and bid him
take that for coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I
remember the kissing of her batler, and the cow's
dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked;
and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of
her, from whom I took two cods and, giving her
them again, said with weeping tears "Wear these for
my sake." We that are true lovers run into strange
capers. But as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature
in love mortal in folly.

Thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.

Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own
wit till I break my shins against it.


Jove, Jove, this shepherd's passion
Is much upon my fashion.

And mine, but it grows something stale
with me.

I pray you_PL, one of you_PL question yond man, if he
for gold will give us any food. I faint almost to death.

Holla, you_SG clown!

Peace, fool. He's not thy kinsman.

Who calls?

Your_SG betters, sir.

Else are they very wretched.

Peace, I say. 
 Good even to you_SG, friend.


And to you_SG, gentle sir, and to you_PL all.

I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
Here's a young maid with travel much oppressed,
And faints for succor.

Fair sir, I pity her
And wish for her sake more than for mine own
My fortunes were more able to relieve her.
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you_PL will feed on. But what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you_PL be.


What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?


That young swain that you_UNK saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying anything.


I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.


And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.


Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
Go with me. If you_PL like upon report
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your_PL very faithful feeder be
And buy it with your_PL gold right suddenly.


Song.

	   Under the greenwood tree
	   Who loves to lie with me
	   And turn his merry note
	   Unto the sweet bird's throat,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither.
	      Here shall he see
	      No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.

More, more, I prithee, more.

It will make you_SG melancholy, Monsieur
Jaques.

I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck
melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs.
More, I prithee, more.

My voice is ragged. I know I cannot please you_SG.

I do not desire you_SG to please me. I do desire
you_SG to sing. Come, more, another stanzo. Call you_SG
'em "stanzos"?

What you_SG will, Monsieur Jaques.

Nay, I care not for their names. They owe me
nothing. Will you_SG sing?

More at your_SG request than to please myself.

Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank
you_SG. But that they call "compliment" is like th'
encounter of two dog-apes. And when a man thanks
me heartily, methinks I have given him a penny and
he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come, sing. And
you_PL that will not, hold your_PL tongues.

Well, I'll end the song.--Sirs, cover the while;
the Duke will drink under this tree.--He hath been
all this day to look you_UNK.

And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is
too disputable for my company. I think of as many
matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no
boast of them. Come, warble, come.

Song.

	   Who doth ambition shun
	   And loves to live i' th' sun,
	   Seeking the food he eats
	   And pleased with what he gets,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither.
	      Here shall he see
	      No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.

I'll give you_SG a verse to this note that I made
yesterday in despite of my invention.

And I'll sing it.

Thus it goes:
	   If it do come to pass
	   That any man turn ass,
	   Leaving his wealth and ease
	   A stubborn will to please,
	Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame.
	      Here shall he see
	      Gross fools as he,
	An if he will come to me.

What's that "ducdame"?

'Tis a Greek invocation to call fools into a
circle. I'll go sleep if I can. If I cannot, I'll rail
against all the first-born of Egypt.

And I'll go seek the Duke. His banquet is
prepared.


  Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for
food. Here lie I down and measure out my grave.
Farewell, kind master.	

  Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in
thee? Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a
little. If this uncouth forest yield anything savage, I
will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee.
Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my
sake, be comfortable. Hold death awhile at the
arm's end. I will here be with thee presently, and if
I bring thee not something to eat, I will give thee
leave to die. But if thou diest before I come, thou art
a mocker of my labor. Well said. Thou look'st
cheerly, and I'll be with thee quickly. Yet thou liest
in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some
shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner if
there live anything in this desert. Cheerly, good
Adam.

I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can nowhere find him like a man.


My lord, he is but even now gone hence.
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.


If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go seek him. Tell him I would speak with him.

He saves my labor by his own approach.

Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this
That your_SG poor friends must woo your_SG company?
What, you_SG look merrily.


A fool, a fool, I met a fool i' th' forest,
A motley fool. A miserable world!
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down and basked him in the sun
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
"Good morrow, fool," quoth I. "No, sir," quoth he,
"Call me not 'fool' till heaven hath sent me
fortune."
And then he drew a dial from his poke
And, looking on it with lack-luster eye,
Says very wisely "It is ten o'clock.
Thus we may see," quoth he, "how the world wags.
'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven.
And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale." When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.

What fool is this?


O worthy fool!--One that hath been a courtier,
And says "If ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it." And in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O, that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat.


Thou shalt have one.

It is my only suit,
Provided that you_SG weed your_SG better judgments
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have.
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The "why" is plain as way to parish church:
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The wise man's folly is anatomized
Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley. Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.


Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.


What, for a counter, would I do but good?


Most mischievous foul sin in chiding sin;
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
And all th' embossed sores and headed evils
That thou with license of free foot hast caught
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.

Why, who cries out on pride
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she such is her neighbor?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then. How then, what then? Let me see
wherein
My tongue hath wronged him. If it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself. If he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild goose flies
Unclaimed of any man.

But who comes here?

  Forbear, and eat no more.

Why, I have eat none yet.


Nor shalt not till necessity be served.

Of what kind should this cock come of?

Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress,
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?


You_SG touched my vein at first. The thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility, yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say.
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.

An you_SG will not be answered with reason, I
must die.

What would you_SG have? Your_SG gentleness shall force
More than your_SG force move us to gentleness.


I almost die for food, and let me have it.


Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.


Speak you_UNK so gently? Pardon me, I pray you_UNK.
I thought that all things had been savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you_SG are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time,
If ever you_UNK have looked on better days,
If ever been where bells have knolled to church,
If ever sat at any good man's feast,
If ever from your_UNK eyelids wiped a tear
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.

True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knolled to church,
And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered.
And therefore sit you_SG down in gentleness,
And take upon command what help we have
That to your_SG wanting may be ministered.


Then but forbear your_UNK food a little while
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
And give it food. There is an old poor man
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.

Go find him out,
And we will nothing waste till you_SG return.


I thank you_UNK; and be blessed for your_UNK good comfort.



Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy.
This wide and universal theater
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in.

All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players.
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then the whining schoolboy with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

Welcome. Set down your_SG venerable burden,
And let him feed.

  I thank you_SG most for him.

  So had you_SG need.--
I scarce can speak to thank you_SG for myself.


Welcome. Fall to. I will not trouble you_PL
As yet to question you_PL about your_PL fortunes.--
Give us some music, and, good cousin, sing.

Song.

	   Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	   Thou art not so unkind
	      As man's ingratitude.
	   Thy tooth is not so keen,
	   Because thou art not seen,
	      Although thy breath be rude.
	Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
	      Then heigh-ho, the holly.
	      This life is most jolly.

	   Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
	   That dost not bite so nigh
	      As benefits forgot.
	   Though thou the waters warp,
	   Thy sting is not so sharp
	      As friend remembered not.
	Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
	      Then heigh-ho, the holly.
	      This life is most jolly.

If that you_SG were the good Sir Rowland's son,
As you_SG have whispered faithfully you_SG were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limned and living in your_SG face,
Be truly welcome hither. I am the duke
That loved your_SG father. The residue of your_SG fortune
Go to my cave and tell me.--Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
Support him by the arm. 
Give me your_SG hand,
And let me all your_SG fortunes understand.

Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is.
Seek him with candle. Bring him, dead or living,
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine,
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
Of what we think against thee.


O, that your_SG Highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.


More villain thou.--Well, push him out of doors,
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.

Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love.
   And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
   Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books,
   And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
That every eye which in this forest looks
   Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere.
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.

And how like you_SG this shepherd's life, Master
Touchstone?

Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a
good life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it
is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I like it very
well; but in respect that it is private, it is a very vile
life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me
well; but in respect it is not in the court, it is
tedious. As it is a spare life, look you_SG, it fits my
humor well; but as there is no more plenty in it, it
goes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy
in thee, shepherd?

No more but that I know the more one sickens,
the worse at ease he is, and that he that wants
money, means, and content is without three good
friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire
to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that
a great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he
that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull
kindred.

Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast
ever in court, shepherd?

No, truly.

Then thou art damned.

Nay, I hope.

Truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted
egg, all on one side.

For not being at court? Your_SG reason.

Why, if thou never wast at court, thou
never saw'st good manners; if thou never saw'st
good manners, then thy manners must be wicked,
and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. Thou
art in a parlous state, shepherd.

Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good
manners at the court are as ridiculous in the
country as the behavior of the country is most
mockable at the court. You_SG told me you_PL salute not at
the court but you_PL kiss your_PL hands. That courtesy
would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.

Instance, briefly. Come, instance.

Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their
fells, you_SG know, are greasy.

Why, do not your_UNK courtier's hands sweat?
And is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as
the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow. A better
instance, I say. Come.

Besides, our hands are hard.

your_PL lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow
again. A more sounder instance. Come.

And they are often tarred over with the surgery
of our sheep; and would you_SG have us kiss tar? The
courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.

Most shallow man. Thou worms' meat in
respect of a good piece of flesh, indeed. Learn of the
wise and perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar,
the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance,
shepherd.

You_SG have too courtly a wit for me. I'll rest.

Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee,
shallow man. God make incision in thee; thou art
raw.

Sir, I am a true laborer. I earn that I eat, get that
I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness,
glad of other men's good, content with my harm,
and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze
and my lambs suck.

That is another simple sin in you_SG, to bring
the ewes and the rams together and to offer to get
your_SG living by the copulation of cattle; to be bawd to
a bell-wether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth
to a crooked-pated old cuckoldly ram, out of
all reasonable match. If thou be'st not damned for
this, the devil himself will have no shepherds. I
cannot see else how thou shouldst 'scape.


Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new
mistress's brother.

	From the east to western Ind
	No jewel is like Rosalind.
	Her worth being mounted on the wind,
	Through all the world bears Rosalind.
	All the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind.
	Let no face be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind.

I'll rhyme you_SG so eight years together,
dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted.
It is the right butter-women's rank to market.

  Out, fool.

For a taste:
	If a hart do lack a hind,
	Let him seek out Rosalind.
	If the cat will after kind,
	So be sure will Rosalind.
	Wintered garments must be lined;
	So must slender Rosalind.
	They that reap must sheaf and bind;
	Then to cart with Rosalind.
	Sweetest nut hath sourest rind;
	Such a nut is Rosalind.
	He that sweetest rose will find
	Must find love's prick, and Rosalind.
This is the very false gallop of verses. Why do you_SG
infect yourself_SG with them?

  Peace, you_SG dull fool. I found
them on a tree.

Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

  I'll graft it with you_SG, and
then I shall graft it with a medlar. Then it will be
the earliest fruit i' th' country, for you_SG 'll be rotten
ere you_SG be half ripe, and that's the right virtue of
the medlar.

You_SG have said, but whether wisely or no,
let the forest judge.

  Peace. Here comes my sister
reading. Stand aside.

	Why should this a desert be?
	   For it is unpeopled? No.
	Tongues I'll hang on every tree
	   That shall civil sayings show.
	Some how brief the life of man
	   Runs his erring pilgrimage,
	That the stretching of a span
	   Buckles in his sum of age;
	Some of violated vows
	   'Twixt the souls of friend and friend.
	But upon the fairest boughs,
	   Or at every sentence' end,
	Will I "Rosalinda" write,
	   Teaching all that read to know
	The quintessence of every sprite
	   Heaven would in little show.
	Therefore heaven nature charged
	   That one body should be filled
	With all graces wide-enlarged.
	   Nature presently distilled
	Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
	   Cleopatra's majesty,
	Atalanta's better part,
	   Sad Lucretia's modesty.
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	   By heavenly synod was devised
	Of many faces, eyes, and hearts
	   To have the touches dearest prized.
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have
	And I to live and die her slave.

  O most gentle Jupiter, what
tedious homily of love have you_SG wearied your_SG parishioners
withal, and never cried "Have patience,
good people!"

  How now?--Back, friends. Shepherd,
go off a little.--Go with him, sirrah.

Come, shepherd, let us make an honorable
retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet
with scrip and scrippage.

Didst thou hear these verses?

O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for
some of them had in them more feet than the verses
would bear.

That's no matter. The feet might bear the verses.

Ay, but the feet were lame and could not
bear themselves without the verse, and therefore
stood lamely in the verse.

But didst thou hear without wondering how thy
name should be hanged and carved upon these
trees?

I was seven of the nine days out of the
wonder before you_SG came, for look here what I
found on a palm tree. 
I was never so berhymed since Pythagoras'
time that I was an Irish rat, which I can hardly
remember.

Trow you_SG who hath done this?

Is it a man?

And a chain, that you_SG once wore, about his neck.
Change you_SG color?

I prithee, who?

O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to
meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
and so encounter.

Nay, but who is it?

Is it possible?

Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary
vehemence, tell me who it is.

O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that
out of all whooping!

Good my complexion, dost thou think
though I am caparisoned like a man, I have a
doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of
delay more is a South Sea of discovery. I prithee,
tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. I would
thou couldst stammer, that thou might'st pour this
concealed man out of thy mouth as wine comes out
of a narrow-mouthed bottle--either too much at
once, or none at all. I prithee take the cork out of
thy mouth, that I may drink thy tidings.

So you_SG may put a man in your_SG belly.

Is he of God's making? What manner of
man? Is his head worth a hat, or his chin worth a
beard?

Nay, he hath but a little beard.

Why, God will send more, if the man will be
thankful. Let me stay the growth of his beard, if
thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's
heels and your_SG heart both in an instant.

Nay, but the devil take mocking. Speak sad
brow and true maid.

I' faith, coz, 'tis he.

Orlando?

Orlando.

Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet
and hose? What did he when thou saw'st him? What
said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What
makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where remains
he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou
see him again? Answer me in one word.

You_SG must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first.
'Tis a word too great for any mouth of this age's size.
To say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
answer in a catechism.

But doth he know that I am in this forest and
in man's apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
day he wrestled?

It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
propositions of a lover. But take a taste of my
finding him, and relish it with good observance. I
found him under a tree like a dropped acorn.

It may well be called Jove's tree when it
drops forth such fruit.

Give me audience, good madam.

Proceed.

There lay he, stretched along like a wounded
knight.

Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
becomes the ground.

Cry "holla" to thy tongue, I prithee. It curvets
unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.

O, ominous! He comes to kill my heart.

I would sing my song without a burden. Thou
bring'st me out of tune.

Do you_SG not know I am a woman? When I
think, I must speak. Sweet, say on.

You_SG bring me out.

Soft, comes he not here?

'Tis he. Slink by, and note him.

I thank you_SG for your_SG company,
but, good faith, I had as lief have been myself alone.

  And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I
thank you_SG too for your_SG society.

God be wi' you_SG. Let's meet as little as we can.

  I do desire we may be better strangers.

I pray you_SG mar no more trees with writing love
songs in their barks.

  I pray you_SG mar no more of my verses with
reading them ill-favoredly.

Rosalind is your_SG love's name?

  Yes, just.

I do not like her name.

  There was no thought of pleasing you_SG when
she was christened.

What stature is she of?

  Just as high as my heart.

You_SG are full of pretty answers. Have you_SG not
been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives and
conned them out of rings?

  Not so. But I answer you_SG right painted cloth,
from whence you_SG have studied your_SG questions.

You_SG have a nimble wit. I think 'twas made of
Atalanta's heels. Will you_SG sit down with me? And we
two will rail against our mistress the world and all
our misery.

  I will chide no breather in the world but
myself, against whom I know most faults.

The worst fault you_SG have is to be in love.

  'Tis a fault I will not change for your_SG best
virtue. I am weary of you_SG.

By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I
found you_SG.

  He is drowned in the brook. Look but in, and
you_SG shall see him.

There I shall see mine own figure.

  Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

I'll tarry no longer with you_SG. Farewell, good
Signior Love.

  I am glad of your_SG departure. Adieu, good
Monsieur Melancholy.	

  I will speak to him like a
saucy lackey, and under that habit play the knave
with him. Do you_SG hear, forester?

  Very well. What would you_SG?

  I pray you_SG, what is 't
o'clock?

  You_SG should ask me what time o' day. There's
no clock in the forest.

  Then there is no true lover
in the forest; else sighing every minute and
groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of
time as well as a clock.

  And why not the swift foot of time? Had not
that been as proper?

  By no means, sir. Time
travels in divers paces with divers persons. I'll tell
you_SG who time ambles withal, who time trots withal,
who time gallops withal, and who he stands still
withal.

  I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

  Marry, he trots hard with a
young maid between the contract of her marriage
and the day it is solemnized. If the interim be but a
se'nnight, time's pace is so hard that it seems the
length of seven year.

  Who ambles time withal?

  With a priest that lacks Latin
and a rich man that hath not the gout, for the one
sleeps easily because he cannot study, and the other
lives merrily because he feels no pain--the one
lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning,
the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious
penury. These time ambles withal.

  Who doth he gallop withal?

  With a thief to the gallows,
for though he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks
himself too soon there.

  Who stays it still withal?

  With lawyers in the vacation,
for they sleep between term and term, and
then they perceive not how time moves.

  Where dwell you_SG, pretty youth?

  With this shepherdess, my
sister, here in the skirts of the forest, like fringe
upon a petticoat.

  Are you_SG native of this place?

  As the cony that you_SG see
dwell where she is kindled.

  Your_SG accent is something finer than you_SG
could purchase in so removed a dwelling.

  I have been told so of many.
But indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught
me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man,
one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in
love. I have heard him read many lectures against it,
and I thank God I am not a woman, to be touched
with so many giddy offenses as he hath generally
taxed their whole sex withal.

  Can you_SG remember any of the principal evils
that he laid to the charge of women?

  There were none principal.
They were all like one another as halfpence are,
every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow
fault came to match it.

  I prithee recount some of them.

  No, I will not cast away my
physic but on those that are sick. There is a man
haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with
carving "Rosalind" on their barks, hangs odes upon
hawthorns and elegies on brambles, all, forsooth,
deifying the name of Rosalind. If I could meet
that fancy-monger, I would give him some good
counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love
upon him.

  I am he that is so love-shaked. I pray you_SG tell
me your_SG remedy.

  There is none of my uncle's
marks upon you_SG. He taught me how to know a man
in love, in which cage of rushes I am sure you_SG are
not prisoner.

  What were his marks?

  A lean cheek, which you_SG
have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you_SG have
not; an unquestionable spirit, which you_SG have not; a
beard neglected, which you_SG have not--but I pardon
you_SG for that, for simply your_SG having in beard is a
younger brother's revenue. Then your_SG hose should
be ungartered, your_SG bonnet unbanded, your_SG sleeve
unbuttoned, Your_SG shoe untied, and everything
about You_SG demonstrating a careless desolation. But
you_SG are no such man. You_SG are rather point-device in
Your_SG accouterments, as loving yourself_SG than seeming
the lover of any other.

  Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe
I love.

  Me believe it? You_SG may as
soon make her that you_SG love believe it, which I
warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does.
That is one of the points in the which women still
give the lie to their consciences. But, in good sooth,
are you_SG he that hangs the verses on the trees
wherein Rosalind is so admired?

  I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

  But are you_SG so much in love
as your_SG rhymes speak?

  Neither rhyme nor reason can express how
much.

  Love is merely a madness,
and, I tell you_SG, deserves as well a dark house and a
whip as madmen do; and the reason why they are
not so punished and cured is that the lunacy is so
ordinary that the whippers are in love too. Yet I
profess curing it by counsel.

  Did you_SG ever cure any so?

  Yes, one, and in this manner.
He was to imagine me his love, his mistress,
and I set him every day to woo me; at which time
would I, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be
effeminate, changeable, longing and liking, proud,
fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears,
full of smiles; for every passion something, and for
no passion truly anything, as boys and women are,
for the most part, cattle of this color; would now
like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then
forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him,
that I drave my suitor from his mad humor of love
to a living humor of madness, which was to forswear
the full stream of the world and to live in a
nook merely monastic. And thus I cured him, and
this way will I take upon me to wash your_SG liver as
clean as a sound sheep's heart, that there shall not
be one spot of love in 't.

  I would not be cured, youth.

  I would cure you_SG if you_SG
would but call me Rosalind and come every day to
my cote and woo me.

  Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me
where it is.

  Go with me to it, and I'll
show it you_SG; and by the way you_SG shall tell me where
in the forest you_SG live. Will you_SG go?

  With all my heart, good youth.

  Nay, you_SG must call me
Rosalind.--Come, sister, will you_SG go?

Come apace, good Audrey. I will fetch up
your_SG goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? Am I the
man yet? Doth my simple feature content you_SG?

Your_SG features, Lord warrant us! What
features?

I am here with thee and thy goats, as the
most capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the
Goths.

O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than
Jove in a thatched house.

When a man's verses cannot be understood,
nor a man's good wit seconded with the
forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more
dead than a great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I
would the gods had made thee poetical.

I do not know what "poetical" is. Is it honest
in deed and word? Is it a true thing?

No, truly, for the truest poetry is the most
feigning, and lovers are given to poetry, and what
they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do
feign.

Do you_SG wish, then, that the gods had made me
poetical?

I do, truly, for thou swear'st to me thou
art honest. Now if thou wert a poet, I might have
some hope thou didst feign.

Would you_SG not have me honest?

No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favored;
for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a
sauce to sugar.

A material fool.

Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the
gods make me honest.

Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a
foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean
dish.

I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am
foul.

Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness;
sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
be, I will marry thee; and to that end I have been
with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next village,
who hath promised to meet me in this place of the
forest and to couple us.

  I would fain see this meeting.

Well, the gods give us joy.

Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful
heart, stagger in this attempt, for here we have no
temple but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts.
But what though? Courage. As horns are odious,
they are necessary. It is said "Many a man knows no
end of his goods." Right: many a man has good
horns and knows no end of them. Well, that is the
dowry of his wife; 'tis none of his own getting.
Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, no. The
noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the
single man therefore blessed? No. As a walled town
is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of
a married man more honorable than the bare brow
of a bachelor. And by how much defense is better
than no skill, by so much is a horn more precious
than to want.

Here comes Sir Oliver.--Sir Oliver Martext, you_SG are
well met. Will you_SG dispatch us here under this tree,
or shall we go with you_SG to your_SG chapel?

Is there none here to give the
woman?

I will not take her on gift of any man.

Truly, she must be given, or the
marriage is not lawful.

Proceed, proceed. I'll give
her.

Good even, good Monsieur What- you_UNK -call-'t.
How do you_SG, sir? You_SG are very well met. God
'ild you_SG for your_SG last company. I am very glad to see
you_SG. Even a toy in hand here, sir. Nay, pray be
covered.

Will you_SG be married, motley?

As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his
curb, and the falcon her bells, so man hath his
desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be
nibbling.

And will you_SG, being a man of your_SG breeding, be
married under a bush like a beggar? Get you_SG to
church, and have a good priest that can tell you_SG
what marriage is. This fellow will but join you_PL
together as they join wainscot. Then one of you_PL will
prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp,
warp.

I am not in the mind but I were better to
be married of him than of another, for he is not like
to marry me well, and not being well married, it
will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my
wife.

Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

Come, sweet Audrey. We must be married,
or we must live in bawdry.--Farewell, good
Master Oliver, not
	      O sweet Oliver,
	      O brave Oliver,
	   Leave me not behind thee,
But
	      Wind away,
	      Begone, I say,
	   I will not to wedding with thee.

'Tis no matter. Ne'er a fantastical
knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling.

Never talk to me. I will weep.

Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider
that tears do not become a man.

But have I not cause to weep?

As good cause as one would desire. Therefore
weep.

His very hair is of the dissembling color.

Something browner than Judas's. Marry, his
kisses are Judas's own children.

I' faith, his hair is of a good color.

An excellent color. Your_SG chestnut was ever the
only color.

And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the
touch of holy bread.

He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A
nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously.
The very ice of chastity is in them.

But why did he swear he would come this
morning, and comes not?

Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

Do you_SG think so?

Yes, I think he is not a pickpurse nor a horse-stealer,
but for his verity in love, I do think him as
concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut.

Not true in love?

Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.

You_SG have heard him swear downright he
was.

"Was" is not "is." Besides, the oath of a lover is
no stronger than the word of a tapster. They are
both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends
here in the forest on the Duke your_SG father.

I met the Duke yesterday and had much
question with him. He asked me of what parentage
I was. I told him, of as good as he. So he laughed
and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when
there is such a man as Orlando?

O, that's a brave man. He writes brave verses,
speaks brave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks
them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
his lover, as a puny tilter that spurs his horse but on
one side breaks his staff like a noble goose; but all's
brave that youth mounts and folly guides.

Who comes here?


Mistress and master, you_PL have oft inquired
After the shepherd that complained of love,
Who you_PL saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.

  Well, and what of him?


If you_PL will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you_PL
If you_PL will mark it.

O come, let us remove.
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
Bring us to this sight, andyou shall say
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.

Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe.
Say that you_SG love me not, but say_SG not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes
hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon. Will you_SG sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

I would not be thy executioner.
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye.
'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it. Lean upon a rush,
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
That can do hurt.

O dear Phoebe,
If ever--as that ever may be near--
You_SG meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you_SG know the wounds invisible
That love's keen arrows make.

But till that time
Come not thou near me. And when that time
comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.

And why, I pray you_SG? Who might be your_SG mother,
That you_SG insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you_SG have no
beauty--
As, by my faith, I see no more in you_SG
Than without candle may go dark to bed--
Must you_SG be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you_SG look on me?
I see no more in you_SG than in the ordinary
Of nature's sale-work.--'Od's my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes, too.--
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it.
'Tis not your_SG inky brows, your_SG black silk hair,
Your_SG bugle eyeballs, nor your_SG cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your_SG worship.--
You_SG foolish shepherd, wherefore do you_SG follow her,
Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
You_SG are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you_SG
That makes the world full of ill-favored children.
'Tis not her glass but you_SG that flatters her,
And out of you_SG she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.--
But, mistress, know yourself_SG. Down on your_SG knees
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love,
For I must tell you_SG friendly in your_SG ear,
Sell when you_SG can; you_SG are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer.
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.--
So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you_UNK well.


Sweet youth, I pray you_SG chide a year together.
I had rather hear you_SG chide than this man woo.

He's fall'n in love with your_SG
foulness. And she'll fall in love with
my anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee with
frowning looks, I'll sauce her with bitter words. 
Why look you_SG so upon me?

For no ill will I bear you_SG.


I pray you_SG, do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine.
Besides, I like you_SG not. If you_SG will know my house,
'Tis at the tuft of olives, here hard by.--
Will you_SG go, sister?--Shepherd, ply her hard.--
Come, sister.--Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud. Though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.--
Come, to our flock.


Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
"Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?"


Sweet Phoebe--

Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

Sweet Phoebe, pity me.


Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.


Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.
If you_SG do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your_SG sorrow and my grief
Were both extermined.


Thou hast my love. Is not that neighborly?


I would have you_SG.

Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure, and I'll employ thee too.
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.


So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then
A scattered smile, and that I'll live upon.


Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?


Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.


Think not I love him, though I ask for him.
'Tis but a peevish boy--yet he talks well--
But what care I for words? Yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth--not very pretty--
But sure he's proud--and yet his pride becomes
him.
He'll make a proper man. The best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offense, his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall--yet for his years he's tall.
His leg is but so-so--and yet 'tis well.
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the
difference
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they marked
him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him; but for my part
I love him not nor hate him not; and yet
I have more cause to hate him than to love him.
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me.
I marvel why I answered not again.
But that's all one: omittance is no quittance.
I'll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it. Wilt thou, Silvius?


Phoebe, with all my heart.

I'll write it straight.
The matter's in my head and in my heart.
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
Go with me, Silvius.

I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better
acquainted with thee.

  They say you_SG are a melancholy
fellow.

I am so. I do love it better than laughing.

  Those that are in extremity
of either are abominable fellows and betray
themselves to every modern censure worse than
drunkards.

Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.

  Why then, 'tis good to be a
post.

I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which
is emulation; nor the musician's, which is fantastical;
nor the courtier's, which is proud; nor the
soldier's, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer's,
which is politic; nor the lady's, which is nice; nor
the lover's, which is all these; but it is a melancholy
of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted
from many objects, and indeed the sundry
contemplation of my travels, in which my often
rumination wraps me in a most humorous sadness.

  A traveller. By my faith, you_SG
have great reason to be sad. I fear you_SG have sold
your_SG own lands to see other men's. Then to have
seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes
and poor hands.

Yes, I have gained my experience.

  And your_SG experience makes
you_SG sad. I had rather have a fool to make me merry
than experience to make me sad--and to travel for
it too.

Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind.

Nay then, God be wi' you_SG, an you_SG talk in blank
verse.

  Farewell, Monsieur Traveller.
Look you_SG lisp and wear strange suits, disable all
the benefits of your_SG own country, be out of love with
your_SG nativity, and almost chide God for making you_SG
that countenance you_SG are, or I will scarce think you_SG
have swam in a gondola.
Why, how now, Orlando, where have you_SG been all
this while? You_SG a lover? An you_SG serve me such
another trick, never come in my sight more.

  My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of
my promise.

  Break an hour's promise in
love? He that will divide a minute into a thousand
parts and break but a part of the thousand part of a
minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him
that Cupid hath clapped him o' th' shoulder, but I'll
warrant him heart-whole.

  Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

  Nay, an you_SG be so tardy,
come no more in my sight. I had as lief be wooed of
a snail.

  Of a snail?

  Ay, of a snail, for though he
comes slowly, he carries his house on his head--a
better jointure, I think, than you_SG make a woman.
Besides, he brings his destiny with him.

  What's that?

  Why, horns, which such as
you_SG are fain to be beholding to your_SG wives for. But
he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the
slander of his wife.

  Virtue is no hornmaker, and my Rosalind is
virtuous.

  And I am your_SG Rosalind.

  It pleases him to call you_SG so, but he
hath a Rosalind of a better leer than you_SG.

Come, woo me,
woo me, for now I am in a holiday humor, and like
enough to consent. What would you_SG say to me now
an I were your_SG very, very Rosalind?

  I would kiss before I spoke.

  Nay, you_SG were better speak
first, and when you_SG were gravelled for lack of
matter, you_SG might take occasion to kiss. Very good
orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for
lovers lacking--God warn us--matter, the cleanliest
shift is to kiss.

  How if the kiss be denied?

  Then she puts you_SG to entreaty,
and there begins new matter.

  Who could be out, being before his beloved
mistress?

  Marry, that should you_SG if I
were your_SG mistress, or I should think my honesty
ranker than my wit.

  What, of my suit?

  Not out of your_SG apparel, and
yet out of your_SG suit. Am not I your_SG Rosalind?

  I take some joy to say you_SG are because I
would be talking of her.

  Well, in her person I say I
will not have you_SG.

  Then, in mine own person I die.

  No, faith, die by attorney.
The poor world is almost six thousand years old,
and in all this time there was not any man died in
his own person, videlicet, in a love cause. Troilus
had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club, yet
he did what he could to die before, and he is one of
the patterns of love. Leander, he would have lived
many a fair year though Hero had turned nun, if it
had not been for a hot midsummer night, for, good
youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont
and, being taken with the cramp, was
drowned; and the foolish chroniclers of that age
found it was Hero of Sestos. But these are all lies.
Men have died from time to time and worms have
eaten them, but not for love.

  I would not have my right Rosalind of this
mind, for I protest her frown might kill me.

  By this hand, it will not kill a
fly. But come; now I will be your_SG Rosalind in a more
coming-on disposition, and ask me what you_SG will, I
will grant it.

  Then love me, Rosalind.

  Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and
Saturdays and all.

  And wilt thou have me?

  Ay, and twenty such.

  What sayest thou?

  Are you_SG not good?

  I hope so.

  Why then, can one desire
too much of a good thing?--Come, sister, you_SG shall
be the priest and marry us.--Give me your_SG hand,
Orlando.--What do you_SG say, sister?

Pray thee marry us.

  I cannot say the words.

  You_SG must begin "Will you_SG,
Orlando--"

  Go to.--Will you_SG, Orlando, have to
wife this Rosalind?

  I will.

  Ay, but when?

  Why now, as fast as she can marry us.

  Then you_SG must say "I take
thee, Rosalind, for wife."

  I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

  I might ask you_SG for your_SG
commission, but I do take thee, Orlando, for my
husband. There's a girl goes before the priest, and
certainly a woman's thought runs before her
actions.

  So do all thoughts. They are winged.

  Now tell me how long you_SG
would have her after you_SG have possessed her?

  Forever and a day.

  Say "a day" without the
"ever." No, no, Orlando, men are April when they
woo, December when they wed. Maids are May
when they are maids, but the sky changes when
they are wives. I will be more jealous of thee than a
Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen, more clamorous
than a parrot against rain, more newfangled than
an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. I
will weep for nothing, like Diana in the fountain,
and I will do that when you_SG are disposed to be
merry. I will laugh like a hyena, and that when thou
art inclined to sleep.

  But will my Rosalind do so?

  By my life, she will do as I
do.

  O, but she is wise.

  Or else she could not have
the wit to do this. The wiser, the waywarder. Make
the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the
casement. Shut that, and 'twill out at the keyhole.
Stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the
chimney.

  A man that had a wife with such a wit, he
might say "Wit, whither wilt?"

  Nay, you_SG might keep that
check for it till you_SG met your_SG wife's wit going to
your_SG neighbor's bed.

  And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

  Marry, to say she came to
seek you_SG there. You_SG shall never take her without her
answer unless you_SG take her without her tongue. O,
that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's
occasion, let her never nurse her child
herself, for she will breed it like a fool.

  For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave
thee.

  Alas, dear love, I cannot lack
thee two hours.

  I must attend the Duke at dinner. By two
o'clock I will be with thee again.

  Ay, go your_SG ways, go your_SG
ways. I knew what you_SG would prove. My friends told
me as much, and I thought no less. That flattering
tongue of yours_SG won me. 'Tis but one cast away, and
so, come, death. Two o'clock is your_SG hour?

  Ay, sweet Rosalind.

  By my troth, and in good
earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty
oaths that are not dangerous, if you_SG break one jot of
your_SG promise or come one minute behind your_SG
hour, I will think you_SG the most pathetical break-promise,
and the most hollow lover, and the most
unworthy of her you_SG call Rosalind that may be
chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful.
Therefore beware my censure, and keep your_SG
promise.

  With no less religion than if thou wert indeed
my Rosalind. So, adieu.

  Well, time is the old justice
that examines all such offenders, and let time try.
Adieu.

You_SG have simply misused our sex in your_SG love-prate.
We must have your_SG doublet and hose plucked
over your_SG head and show the world what the bird
hath done to her own nest.

O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
didst know how many fathom deep I am in love. But
it cannot be sounded; my affection hath an
unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.

Or rather bottomless, that as fast as you_SG pour
affection in, it runs out.

No, that same wicked bastard of Venus, that
was begot of thought, conceived of spleen, and born
of madness, that blind rascally boy that abuses
everyone's eyes because his own are out, let him be
judge how deep I am in love. I'll tell thee, Aliena, I
cannot be out of the sight of Orlando. I'll go find a
shadow and sigh till he come.

And I'll sleep.

Which is he that killed the deer?

Sir, it was I.

Let's present him to the
Duke like a Roman conqueror. And it would do well
to set the deer's horns upon his head for a branch of
victory.--Have you_SG no song, forester, for this
purpose?

Yes, sir.

Sing it. 'Tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
make noise enough.

Music. Song.

	What shall he have that killed the deer?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	   Then sing him home.

	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn.
	It was a crest ere thou wast born.
	   Thy father's father wore it,
	   And thy father bore it.
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.

How say you_SG now? Is it not past two o'clock?
And here much Orlando.

I warrant you_SG, with pure love and troubled brain
he hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth
to sleep.

Look who comes here.

My errand is to you_SG, fair youth.
My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you_SG this.
I know not the contents, but as I guess
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me.
I am but as a guiltless messenger.

Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all.
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners.
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will,
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt.
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your_SG own device.


No, I protest. I know not the contents.
Phoebe did write it.

  Come, come, you_SG are a
fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand. She has a leathern hand,
A freestone-colored hand. I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands.
She has a huswife's hand--but that's no matter.
I say she never did invent this letter.
This is a man's invention, and his hand.

Sure it is hers.


Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style,
A style for challengers. Why, she defies me
Like Turk to Christian. Women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you_SG hear the letter?


So please you_SG, for I never heard it yet,
Yet heard too much of Phoebe's cruelty.


She Phoebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes.

	Art thou god to shepherd turned,
	That a maiden's heart hath burned?
Can a woman rail thus?

Call you_SG this railing?

	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?
Did you_SG ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your_SG bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect?
	Whiles you_SG chid me, I did love.
	How then might your_SG prayers move?
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me,
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me, and all that I can make,
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then I'll study how to die.

Call you_SG this chiding?

  Alas, poor shepherd.

  Do you_SG pity him? No, he
deserves no pity.--Wilt thou love such a woman?
What, to make thee an instrument and play false
strains upon thee? Not to be endured. Well, go your_SG
way to her, for I see love hath made thee a tame
snake, and say this to her: that if she love me, I
charge her to love thee; if she will not, I will never
have her unless thou entreat for her. If you_SG be a true
lover, hence, and not a word, for here comes more
company.

Good morrow, fair ones. Pray you_PL, if you_PL know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?


West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom;
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your_SG right hand brings you_SG to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself.
There's none within.


If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you_PL by description--
Such garments, and such years. "The boy is fair,
Of female favor, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister; the woman low
And browner than her brother." Are not you_UNK
The owner of the house I did inquire for?


It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.


Orlando doth commend him to you_PL both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you_SG he?

I am. What must we understand by this?


Some of my shame, if you_PL will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stained.

  I pray you_SG tell it.


When last the young Orlando parted from you_UNK,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell. He threw his eye aside--
And mark what object did present itself:
Under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with
age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched, ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back. About his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approached
The opening of his mouth. But suddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself
And, with indented glides, did slip away
Into a bush, under which bush's shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir--for 'tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.


O, I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.

  And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.


But to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?


Twice did he turn his back and purposed so,
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling,
From miserable slumber I awaked.

  Are you_SG his brother?

  Was 't you_SG he rescued?


Was 't you_SG that did so oft contrive to kill him?


'Twas I, but 'tis not I. I do not shame
To tell you_PL what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.


But for the bloody napkin?

  By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed--
As how I came into that desert place--
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love;
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you_SG might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.

Why, how now, Ganymede, sweet Ganymede?


Many will swoon when they do look on blood.


There is more in it.--Cousin Ganymede.

  Look, he recovers.

I would I were at home.

  We'll lead you_SG thither.--I pray you_SG,
will you_SG take him by the arm?

Be of good cheer,
youth. You_SG a man? You_SG lack a man's heart.

  I do so, I confess it. Ah,
sirrah, a body would think this was well-counterfeited.
I pray you_SG tell your_SG brother how well I
counterfeited. Heigh-ho.

  This was not counterfeit. There is too great
testimony in your_SG complexion that it was a passion
of earnest.

  Counterfeit, I assure you_SG.

  Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to
be a man.

  So I do; but, i' faith, I should
have been a woman by right.

  Come, you_SG look paler and paler. Pray
you_SG draw homewards.--Good sir, go with us.


That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you_SG excuse my brother, Rosalind.

  I shall devise something.
But I pray you_SG commend my counterfeiting to him.
Will you_SG go?

We shall find a time, Audrey. Patience,
gentle Audrey.

Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the
old gentleman's saying.

A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most
vile Martext. But Audrey, there is a youth here in
the forest lays claim to you_SG.

Ay, I know who 'tis. He hath no interest in me
in the world.

Here comes the man you_SG mean.

It is meat and drink to me to see a clown.
By my troth, we that have good wits have much to
answer for. We shall be flouting. We cannot hold.

Good ev'n, Audrey.

God gi' good ev'n, William.

And good ev'n to you_SG, sir.

Good ev'n, gentle friend. Cover thy head,
cover thy head. Nay, prithee, be covered. How old
are you_SG, friend?

Five-and-twenty, sir.

A ripe age. Is thy name William?

William, sir.

A fair name. Wast born i' th' forest here?

Ay, sir, I thank God.

"Thank God." A good answer. Art rich?

'Faith sir, so-so.

"So-so" is good, very good, very excellent
good. And yet it is not: it is but so-so. Art thou wise?

Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

Why, thou sayst well. I do now remember
a saying: "The fool doth think he is wise, but the
wise man knows himself to be a fool." The heathen
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
would open his lips when he put it into his mouth,
meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
lips to open. You_SG do love this maid?

I do, sir.

Give me your_SG hand. Art thou learned?

No, sir.

Then learn this of me: to have is to have.
For it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured
out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth
empty the other. For all your_SG writers do consent
that ipse is "he." Now, you_SG are not ipse, for I am he.

Which he, sir?

He, sir, that must marry this woman.
Therefore, you_SG clown, abandon--which is in the
vulgar "leave"--the society--which in the boorish
is "company"--of this female--which in the common
is "woman"; which together is, abandon the
society of this female, or, clown, thou perishest; or,
to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, I kill
thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death,
thy liberty into bondage. I will deal in poison with
thee, or in bastinado, or in steel. I will bandy with
thee in faction. I will o'errun thee with policy. I
will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways. Therefore
tremble and depart.

Do, good William.

God rest you_SG merry, sir.

Our master and mistress seeks you_SG. Come away,
away.

Trip, Audrey, trip, Audrey.--I attend, I
attend.

  Is 't possible that on so little acquaintance
you_SG should like her? That, but seeing, you_SG should
love her? And loving, woo? And wooing, she should
grant? And will you_SG persever to enjoy her?

  Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
wooing, nor her sudden consenting, but say with
me "I love Aliena"; say with her that she loves me;
consent with both that we may enjoy each other. It
shall be to your_SG good, for my father's house and all
the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I estate
upon you_SG, and here live and die a shepherd.

  You_SG have my consent. Let your_UNK wedding be
tomorrow. Thither will I invite the Duke and all 's
contented followers. Go you_SG and prepare Aliena,
for, look you_SG, here comes my Rosalind.

God save you_SG,
brother.

  And you_SG, fair sister.	

  O my dear Orlando, how it
grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.

  It is my arm.

  I thought thy heart had been
wounded with the claws of a lion.

  Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

  Did your_SG brother tell you_SG
how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed me
your_SG handkercher?

  Ay, and greater wonders than that.

  O, I know where you_SG are.
Nay, 'tis true. There was never anything so sudden
but the fight of two rams, and Caesar's thrasonical
brag of "I came, saw, and overcame." For your_SG
brother and my sister no sooner met but they
looked, no sooner looked but they loved, no sooner
loved but they sighed, no sooner sighed but they
asked one another the reason, no sooner knew the
reason but they sought the remedy; and in these
degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage,
which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent
before marriage. They are in the very wrath
of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part
them.

  They shall be married tomorrow, and I will
bid the Duke to the nuptial. But O, how bitter a
thing it is to look into happiness through another
man's eyes. By so much the more shall I tomorrow
be at the height of heart-heaviness by how much I
shall think my brother happy in having what he
wishes for.

  Why, then, tomorrow I cannot
serve your_SG turn for Rosalind?

  I can live no longer by thinking.

  I will weary you_SG then no
longer with idle talking. Know of me then--for
now I speak to some purpose--that I know you_SG are
a gentleman of good conceit. I speak not this that
you_SG should bear a good opinion of my knowledge,
insomuch I say I know you_SG are. Neither do I labor
for a greater esteem than may in some little measure
draw a belief from you_SG to do yourself_SG good, and
not to grace me. Believe then, if you_SG please, that I
can do strange things. I have, since I was three year
old, conversed with a magician, most profound in
his art and yet not damnable. If you_SG do love Rosalind
so near the heart as your_SG gesture cries it out,
when your_SG brother marries Aliena shall you_SG marry
her. I know into what straits of fortune she is
driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear
not inconvenient to you_SG, to set her before your_SG eyes
tomorrow, human as she is, and without any
danger.

  Speak'st thou in sober meanings?

  By my life I do, which I
tender dearly, though I say I am a magician. Therefore
put you_SG in your_SG best array, bid your_SG friends; for
if you_SG will be married tomorrow, you_SG shall, and to
Rosalind, if you_SG will.

Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of
hers.

Youth, you_SG have done me much ungentleness
To show the letter that I writ to you_SG.


I care not if I have. It is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you_SG.
You_SG are there followed by a faithful shepherd.
Look upon him, love him; he worships you_SG.

Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.


It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phoebe.

And I for Ganymede.

  And I for Rosalind.

  And I for no woman.


It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phoebe.

And I for Ganymede.

  And I for Rosalind.

  And I for no woman.


It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance,
And so am I for Phoebe.

And so am I for Ganymede.

  And so am I for Rosalind.

  And so am I for no
woman.


If this be so, why blame you_SG me to love you_SG?


If this be so, why blame you_SG me to love you_SG?


If this be so, why blame you_SG me to love you_SG?

  Why do you_SG speak too,
"Why blame you_SG me to love you_SG?"

  To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

  Pray you_UNK, no more of this.
'Tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the
moon.  I will help you_SG if I can.
I would love you_SG if I could.--Tomorrow
meet me all together.  I will marry
you_SG if ever I marry woman, and I'll be married
tomorrow. I will satisfy you_SG if ever I
satisfy man, and you_SG shall be married tomorrow.
 I will content you_SG, if what pleases you_SG
contents you_SG, and you_SG shall be married tomorrow.
As you_SG love Rosalind, meet. 
As you_SG love Phoebe, meet.--And as I love
no woman, I'll meet. So fare you_PL well. I have left
you_PL commands.

I'll not fail, if I live.

Nor I.

  Nor I.

Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey. Tomorrow
will we be married.

I do desire it with all my heart, and I hope it is
no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
world.

Here come two of the banished duke's pages.

Well met, honest gentleman.

By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and
a song.

We are for you_SG. Sit i' th' middle.

Shall we clap into 't roundly, without
hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which
are the only prologues to a bad voice?

I' faith, i' faith, and both in a tune like
two gypsies on a horse.

Song.

	It was a lover and his lass,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	That o'er the green cornfield did pass
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	Between the acres of the rye,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	These pretty country folks would lie
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	This carol they began that hour,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	How that a life was but a flower
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	And therefore take the present time,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	For love is crowned with the prime,
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

Truly, young gentlemen, though there
was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was
very untunable.

You_SG are deceived, sir. We kept time. We lost
not our time.

By my troth, yes. I count it but time lost
to hear such a foolish song. God be wi' you_PL, and
God mend your_PL voices.--Come, Audrey.

Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?

I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

Patience once more whiles our compact is urged.
You_SG say, if I bring in your_SG Rosalind,
You_SG will bestow her on Orlando here?

That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

And you_SG say you_SG will have her when I bring her?

That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

You_SG say you_SG 'll marry me if I be willing?

That will I, should I die the hour after.

But if you_SG do refuse to marry me,
You_SG 'll give yourself_SG to this most faithful shepherd?

So is the bargain.

You_SG say that you_SG 'll have Phoebe if she will?


Though to have her and death were both one thing.


I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you_SG your_SG word, O duke, to give your_SG
daughter,--
You_SG yours_SG, Orlando, to receive his daughter.--
Keep you_SG your_SG word, Phoebe, that you_SG 'll marry me,
Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd.--
Keep your_SG word, Silvius, that you_SG 'll marry her
If she refuse me. And from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.

I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter's favor.


My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your_SG daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician
Obscured in the circle of this forest.

There is sure another flood toward, and these
couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called
fools.

Salutation and greeting to you_PL all.

Good my lord, bid him welcome.
This is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so
often met in the forest. He hath been a courtier, he
swears.

If any man doubt that, let him put me to
my purgation. I have trod a measure. I have flattered
a lady. I have been politic with my friend,
smooth with mine enemy. I have undone three
tailors. I have had four quarrels, and like to have
fought one.

And how was that ta'en up?

Faith, we met and found the quarrel was
upon the seventh cause.

How "seventh cause"?--Good my lord, like
this fellow.

I like him very well.

God 'ild you_SG, sir. I desire you_SG of the like. I
press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
copulatives, to swear and to forswear, according as
marriage binds and blood breaks. A poor virgin, sir,
an ill-favored thing, sir, but mine own. A poor
humor of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
will. Rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor
house, as your_SG pearl in your_SG foul oyster.

By my faith, he is very swift and
sententious.

According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such
dulcet diseases.

But for the seventh cause. How did you_SG find the
quarrel on the seventh cause?

Upon a lie seven times removed.--Bear
your_SG body more seeming, Audrey.--As thus, sir: I
did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard. He
sent me word if I said his beard was not cut well, he
was in the mind it was. This is called "the retort
courteous." If I sent him word again it was not well
cut, he would send me word he cut it to please
himself. This is called "the quip modest." If again it
was not well cut, he disabled my judgment. This is
called "the reply churlish." If again it was not well
cut, he would answer I spake not true. This is called
"the reproof valiant." If again it was not well cut, he
would say I lie. This is called "the countercheck
quarrelsome," and so to "the lie circumstantial,"
and "the lie direct."

And how oft did you_SG say his beard was not well
cut?

I durst go no further than the lie circumstantial,
nor he durst not give me the lie direct, and
so we measured swords and parted.

Can you_SG nominate in order now the degrees of
the lie?

O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as
you_SG have books for good manners. I will name you_SG
the degrees: the first, "the retort courteous"; the
second, "the quip modest"; the third, "the reply
churlish"; the fourth, "the reproof valiant"; the
fifth, "the countercheck quarrelsome"; the sixth,
"the lie with circumstance"; the seventh, "the lie
direct." All these you_SG may avoid but the lie direct,
and you_SG may avoid that too with an "if." I knew
when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but
when the parties were met themselves, one of them
thought but of an "if," as: "If you_SG said so, then I said
so." And they shook hands and swore brothers.
Your_SG "if" is the only peacemaker: much virtue in
"if."

Is not this a rare fellow, my lord?
He's as good at anything and yet a fool.

He uses his folly like a stalking-horse,
and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

	Then is there mirth in heaven
	When earthly things made even
	   Atone together.
	Good duke, receive thy daughter.
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	   Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his,
	Whose heart within his bosom is.

To you_SG I give myself, for I am yours_SG.
To you_SG I give myself, for I am yours_SG.

If there be truth in sight, you_SG are my daughter.

If there be truth in sight, you_SG are my Rosalind.

If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu.

I'll have no father, if you_SG be not he.
I'll have no husband, if you_SG be not he,
Nor ne'er wed woman, if you_SG be not
she.


	Peace, ho! I bar confusion.
	'Tis I must make conclusion
	   Of these most strange events.
	Here's eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymen's bands,
	   If truth holds true contents.
	You_SG and you_SG no cross shall part.
	You_SG and you_SG are heart in heart.
	You_SG to his love must accord
	Or have a woman to your_SG lord.
	You_SG and you_SG are sure together
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves_PL with questioning,
	That reason wonder may diminish
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

Song.


	Wedding is great Juno's crown,
	   O blessed bond of board and bed.
	'Tis Hymen peoples every town.
	   High wedlock then be honored.
	Honor, high honor, and renown
	To Hymen, god of every town.

O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me,
Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.

I will not eat my word. Now thou art mine,
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

Let me have audience for a word or two.
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword;
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
Where, meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banished brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true
I do engage my life.

Welcome, young man.
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.--
First, in this forest let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot,
And, after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity,
And fall into our rustic revelry.--
Play, music.--And you_PL brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy to th' measures fall.

Sir, by your_SG patience: if I heard you_SG rightly,
The Duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.

He hath.


To him will I. Out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learned.
You_SG to your_SG former honor I bequeath;
Your_SG patience and your_SG virtue well deserves it.
You_SG to a love that your_SG true faith doth
merit.
You_SG to your_SG land, and love, and great
allies.
You_SG to a long and well-deserved bed.
And you_SG to wrangling, for thy
loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled.--So to your_SG
pleasures.
I am for other than for dancing measures.

Stay, Jaques, stay.


To see no pastime, I. What you_SG would have
I'll stay to know at your_SG abandoned cave.	


Proceed, proceed. We'll begin these rites,
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.

It is not the fashion to see the lady the
epilogue, but it is no more unhandsome than to see
the lord the prologue. If it be true that good wine
needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no
epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
and good plays prove the better by the help of good
epilogues. What a case am I in then that am neither
a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you_UNK in
the behalf of a good play! I am not furnished like a
beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. My
way is to conjure you_PL, and I'll begin with the
women. I charge you_PL, O women, for the love you_PL
bear to men, to like as much of this play as please
you_PL. And I charge you_PL, O men, for the love you_PL bear
to women--as I perceive by your_PL simpering, none
of you_PL hates them--that between you_PL and the
women the play may please. If I were a woman, I
would kiss as many of you_PL as had beards that
pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths
that I defied not. And I am sure as many as have
good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will for
my kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.

